# Creating tables

## The `CREATE TABLE` command

The `CREATE TABLE` command is used to make new database tables. An example:

This example shows the syntax for `CREATE TABLE`.

```sql
CREATE TABLE students (
  id NUMBER GENERATED BY DEFAULT ON NULL AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
  name VARCHAR2(100) NOT NULL,
  email VARCHAR2(100) UNIQUE,
  graduated NUMBER(1) DEFAULT 0 NOT NULL,
  cohort NUMBER NOT NULL,
  resume CLOB,
  financial_aid NUMBER(7,2),
  enrolled_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP NOT NULL
);
```

`CREATE TABLE` takes two arguments: the name of the table and a list of columns. Each column has a name, data type, and options. The columns in the above example explained:

* `id NUMBER GENERATED BY DEFAULT ON NULL AS IDENTITY`: The `id` column is of type `NUMBER`. The option `AS IDENTITY` says that we will use this column as a unique identifier for each row. This requires that the column is both unique and not nullable. The id will be automatically created by the database from an increasing sequence.
* `name VARCHAR(100) NOT NULL`: The `name` column is a string with a maximum length of 100 characters. It cannot have a null value.
* `email VARCHAR(100) UNIQUE`: The `email` column is a string with a maximum length of 100 characters. It _can_ be null, but if it has a value, it must be a unique value.
* `graduated NUMBER(1) DEFAULT 0 NOT NULL`: The `graduated` column is a true/false value. It cannot be null, but if you insert a row and do not set the value, it will automatically be set to 0.
* `cohort NUMBER NOT NULL`: The `cohort` column is an integer value and cannot be null.
* `resume CLOB`: The `resume` column stores strings of arbitrary length. It can be null.
* `financial_aid NUMBER(7,2)`: The `financial_aid` column is a decimal value with precision (total number of digits) of 7 and scale (digits right of the decimal point) of 2. It can be null.
* `enrolled_at TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP NOT NULL`: The `enrolled_at` column is a date and time value and cannot be null. If a value is not given, the current date and time are used.

## Deleting tables

To delete a table, use `DROP TABLE <tablename>`.

## Exercise

Create a table in your database for blog posts. They should have:

- an auto-generated primary key
- a title (max 200 characters)
- a body (not limited by size)
- a status (either 'draft' or 'published')
- a datetime to be published
- an author name (max 200 characters)

## References

* ["Creating tables" from the Oracle manual](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/B28359_01/server.111/b28310/tables003.htm#ADMIN01503)
* [Oracle data types](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/B28359_01/server.111/b28286/sql_elements001.htm#SQLRF0021)
* ["Dropping tables" from the Oracle manual](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/B28359_01/server.111/b28310/tables010.htm#ADMIN01505)
